The 24-h period of exposure to chemically defined medium was not
sufficient to reverse the effects imposed on the cells by the serum
used in the first phase of growth. Effect of change in growth
environment on cultured myocardial cells investigated in a
standardized medium. Neonatal rat heart cells cultivated in either of
two different media which varied only in their serum supplements were
transferred to chemically defined medium (Ham's F10) for 24 h before
measuring a variety of parameters. The 24-h period of exposure to
chemically defined medium was not sufficient to reverse the effects
imposed on the cells by the serum used in the first phase of
growth. The cells differed in rate and duration of action potentials
and contractions. The initial serum composition affected the response
of the cells to calcium deficiency. Studies involving the effects of
pharmaceutical reagents such as isoproterenol were also influenced by
the serum. In attempting to determine the cause and possible
mechanism, it was found that mitochondrial membrane permeability for
nitroblue tetrazolium was unchanged. Although the serum supplements
differed in fatty acid composition, the fatty acid profiles of the
cell phospholipids were relatively constant. We conclude that the
function of the cells is affected by the growth environment,
particularly serum; that a short exposure to a uniform chemically
defined medium is not sufficient to reverse these effects; and that
the differences in effects are not the result of changes in the fatty
acid composition of the whole cell phospholipids nor in mitochondrial
membrane permeability as measured by nitroblue tetrazolium.
